Security AI Assistant APIs (#5620)
elastic/security-docs: docs/AI-for-security/api/chat-complete-api.asciidoc

[[chat-complete-api]]
=== Chat Complete API

> The Chat Complete API lets you create new Elastic AI Assistant conversations, and add messages to existing conversations.

Author: I will extend the description, because chat/complete API is the different thing. It allows to communicate to the configured LLM and if needed to persist the result as a conversation (new or extend existing).

[[chat-complete-api]]
=== Complete chat

> The Chat Complete API allows to communicate to the configured LLM and if needed to persist the result as a conversation (new or extend existing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The complete chat API allows you to communicate with the configured large language model (LLM) and, if needed, persist the result as a conversation (create new or extend existing).
```

|`promptId` |String |Default conversation prompt Id. |No
|`persist` |Boolean |Define if the new conversation should be created or updated if `conversationId` is provided. |Yes
|`isStream` |Boolean |Define the type of the response. If isStream equals `true`, the result will be returned as a streaming chunks. |No
|`messages` |<<message-obj,messages object>> |Array of conversation messages. |Yes
|`model` |String |LLM provider specific model to use. |No
|`responseLanguage` |String |Defines the language for LLM to response with. |No
|==============================================

[discrete]
[[message-obj]]
=== `messages` object

[width="100%",options="header"]
|==============================================
|Name |Type |Description |Required

|`role` |String |Message role. Could be "user", "assisatnt" or "system". |Yes
|`content` |String |Message content to send to LLM. |Yes
|`data` |Object |JSON object to extend the context with the specific field of the document. |No
|`fields_to_anonymize` |Array |List of the fields in `data` object, which should be anonymized. |No
|==============================================

[discrete]
=== Example requests

*Example 1*

> Sending the message to LLM and getting the response. The data is anonymized with the central anonimization applied and the extended with the list of the fields to anonymize.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sends a message to the LLM. The data is anonymized with the central anonymization applied and extended with the list of the fields to anonymize.
```

POST api/security_ai_assistant/chat/complete
{
  "connectorId": "my-gpt4o-ai",
  "persist": false,
  "messages": [
    {
      "role": "user",
      "content": "Evaluate the event from the context and format your output neatly in markdown syntax for my Elastic Security case.\nAdd your description, recommended actions and bulleted triage steps. Use the MITRE ATT&CK data provided to add more context and recommendations from MITRE, and hyperlink to the relevant pages on MITRE's website. Be sure to include the user and host risk score data from the context. Your response should include steps that point to Elastic Security specific features, including endpoint response actions, the Elastic Agent OSQuery manager integration (with example osquery queries), timelines and entity analytics and link to all the relevant Elastic Security documentation.",
      "data": {
        "event.category": "process",
        "process.pid": 69516,
        "host.os.version": 14.5,
        "host.os.name": "macOS"
      },
      "fields_to_anonymize": [
        "host.os.name"
      ]
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------

*Example 2*

> Sending the message to LLM within the conversation and the data as a context. The data is anonymized with the central anonimization applied and the extended with the list of the fields to anonymize. Adding the LLM response with the role "assistant" to existing Conversation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sends a message to the LLM within an existing conversation and provides data as a context. The data is anonymized with the central anonymization applied and extended with the list of the fields to anonymize. Adds the LLM response with the role `assistant` to the existing conversation.
```

      "data": {
        "event.category": "process",
        "process.pid": 69516,
        "host.os.version": 14.5,
        "host.os.name": "macOS",
        "host.name": "test-MBP",
        "process.name": "biomesyncd",
        "user.name": "usertest",
        "process.working_directory": "/",
        "event.module": "system",
        "process.executable": "/usr/libexec/biomesyncd",
        "process.args": "/usr/libexec/biomesyncd",
        "message": "Process biomesyncd (PID: 69516) by user usertest STOPPED"
      },
      "fields_to_anonymize": [
        "host.os.name",
        "event.module"
      ]
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------

*Example 3*

> Sending the message to LLM. Creating the new Conversation and adding the LLM response with the role "assistant".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sends a message to the LLM. Creates a new conversation and adds the LLM response with the role `assistant`.
```
